The members of Radiohead met while attending Abingdon School, an independent school for boys in Abingdon, Oxfordshire.
Guitarist and singer Thom Yorke and bassist Colin Greenwood were in the same year, guitarist Ed O'Brien and drummer
Phil Selway the year above, and multi-instrumentalist Jonny Greenwood, brother of Colin, two years below. In 1985,
they formed On a Friday, the name referring to the band's usual rehearsal day in the school's music room. Jonny was
the last to join, first on harmonica and then keyboards, but soon became the lead guitarist; he had previously been
in another band, Illiterate Hands, with musician Nigel Powell and Yorke's brother Andy Yorke. According to Colin,
the band members picked their respective instruments because they wanted to play music together, rather than through
an interest in the particular instrument: "It was more of a collective angle, and if you could contribute by having
someone else play your instrument, then that was really cool." At one point, On a Friday featured a saxophone section.
The band disliked the school's strict atmosphere—the headmaster once charged the band for using a rehearsal room on a
Sunday—and found solace in the school's music department. They credited their music teacher for introducing them to
jazz, film scores, postwar avant-garde music, and 20th-century classical music. Oxfordshire and the Thames Valley had
an active independent music scene in the late 1980s, but it centered on shoegazing bands such as Ride and Slowdive.
Although all but Jonny had left Abingdon by 1987 to attend university, On a Friday continued to rehearse on weekends
and holidays. At the University of Exeter, Yorke played with the band Headless Chickens, performing songs including
future Radiohead material, and met artist Stanley Donwood, who would later create artwork for the band. In 1991, On a
Friday regrouped, sharing a house on the corner of Magdalen Road and Ridgefield Road, Oxford. As On a Friday continued
to perform in Oxford, including more performances at the Jericho Tavern, record labels and producers became interested.
Chris Hufford, Slowdive's producer and co-owner of Oxford's Courtyard Studios, attended an early On a Friday concert at
the Jericho Tavern. Impressed, he and his partner Bryce Edge produced a demo tape and became On a Friday's managers;
they remain Radiohead's managers today. In late 1991, after a chance meeting between Colin and EMI A&R representative
Keith Wozencroft at Our Price, the record shop where Colin worked, On a Friday signed a six-album recording contract
with EMI. At the label's request, the band changed their name; "Radiohead" was taken from the song "Radio Head" on the
Talking Heads album True Stories (1986). Radiohead recorded their debut release, the Drill EP, with Chris Hufford and
Bryce Edge at Courtyard Studios. Released in May 1992, its chart performance was poor. The band enlisted Paul Kolderie
and Sean Slade, who had worked with US indie bands Pixies and Dinosaur Jr., to produce their debut album, recorded
quickly in an Oxford studio in 1992. With the release of the "Creep" single later that year, Radiohead began to receive
attention in the British music press, not all of it favorable; NME described them as "a lily-livered excuse for a rock
band", and "Creep" was blacklisted by BBC Radio 1 because it was deemed "too depressing".Radiohead released their debut
album, Pablo Honey, in February 1993. It stalled at number 22 in the UK charts, as "Creep" and its follow-up singles
"Anyone Can Play Guitar" and "Stop Whispering" failed to become hits. "Pop Is Dead", a non-album single, also sold
poorly. Some critics compared the band's early style to the wave of grunge music popular in the early 1990s, dubbing
them "Nirvana-lite", and Pablo Honey failed to make a critical or a commercial splash upon its initial release. Despite
shared influences with popular guitar acts, and some notice for Yorke's falsetto, Radiohead toured only British
universities and clubs.